Audit log documentation (#1692)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/getting-started/observability/logging/audit-logs/index.md

---
linkTitle: Audit logging
title: Audit logging
description: A guide explaining how to interact with audit logs on Giant Swarm clusters.
weight: 50
menu:
  main:
    identifier: getting-started-observability-logs-auditlogging
    parent: getting-started-observability-logs
user_questions:
  - What are audit logs?
  - What is audit logging?
  - How can I access Kubernetes audit logs?
  - How do I ship audit logs to a remote locations?
aliases:
  - /ui-api/observability/logs/audit-logging
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-atlas
last_review_date: 2023-02-01
---

In this document you will learn what are audit logs, which kind is available on Giant Swarm clusters and how to access / ship them to a remote location.

## Audit logging

> Audit logging is the process of recording any event happening within or to your system (execution of any network call, security events like logins, payment transactions and so on).
> An audit log records any occurence of an event, i.e. who did what and when with as much detail as possible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Audit logging is the process of recording any event happening within or to your system (execution of any network call, security events like logins, payment transactions and so on).
An audit log records any occurrence of an event, i.e. who did what and when with as much detail as possible
```

### Machine audit logs

To provide you with a better visibility and security, Giant Swarm offers you the possibility to access the Machine audit logs.

This solution relies on the [Linux Audit Daemon](https://linux.die.net/man/8/auditd) to collect the logs of any execution happening on the machine.
It is currently configured as such:

```
-a exit,always -F arch=b64 -S execve -k auditing # -k auditing gives those logs a key so we can easily retrieve them
-a exit,always -F arch=b32 -S execve -k auditing
```

This configuration asks the Linux Audit Daemon to trace any `execve` signal happening on the node and renders logs like:

```sh
Feb 06 09:57:37 ip-10-0-5-34.eu-central-1.compute.internal kernel: audit: type=1300 audit(1675677457.491:6132447): arch=c000003e syscall=59 success=yes exit=0 a0=55a8f8fc7fd0 a1=55a8f947eec0 a2=55a8f9b8fd10 a3=55a8f947eec0 items=2 ppid=1 pid=3659596 auid=4294967295 uid=0 gid=0 euid=0 suid=0 fsuid=0 egid=0 sgid=0 fsgid=0 tty=(none) ses=4294967295 comm="update-ssh-keys" exe="/usr/bin/update-ssh-keys" subj=system_u:system_r:kernel_t:s0 key="auditing"
```

> Beware that the Linux Audit Daemon is quite verbose when it comes to logging so you will need to ensure enough storage and bandwidth for your logs.

Reviewer: How customers can do that? it would be good to give them a tip

Author: TBH, I don't really know. My only suggestions would be to use an existing SIEM, elasticsearch or something with s3 capabilities like Loki. I can add that though :D

Author: Done :)

Reviewer: Well I meant how they can increase storage. Is this using docker logs volume? can we increase it? (IIRC we can in some providers)

Author: Ohh that's machine volume size so that's probably something we would increase for them

> Beware that the Linux Audit Daemon is quite verbose when it comes to logging so you will need to ensure enough storage and bandwidth for your logs.

Author: ```suggestion
Beware that the Linux Audit Daemon is quite verbose when it comes to logging so you will need to ensure enough storage and bandwidth for your logs. For this we suggest you use either a SIEM tool, Opensearch or Loki
```

At the moment, the Machine audit logs can be found in `journald` so you can ship them over to your <abbr title="Security information and event management">SIEM</abbr> system.

__Notice:__ The Linux Audit Daemon logs are kernel logs so they need to be accessed as such (e.g. `journalctl -kauditing`)

The Machine audit logs will be shipped to our [Managed Loki](https://github.com/giantswarm/roadmap/issues/311) in the future.

## How to audit logs ship to a remote location

Giant Swarm offers two tools to allow you to get the audit logs for your workload clusters.

> You can also access the access logs for the management clusters but this is not something we provide by default (at least for now). Please contact your Account Engineer to sort out the details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
__Note__: You can also access the access logs for the management clusters but this is not something we provide by default (at least for now). Please contact your Account Engineer to sort out the details.
```

    "auditID": "a6029022-4ff0-4c54-97ed-4099d0ca1923",
    "stage": "RequestReceived",
    "requestURI": "/api/v1/namespaces/default/serviceaccounts?fieldManager=kubectl-create",
    "verb": "create",
    "user": {
        "username": "kubernetes-admin",
        "groups": ["system:masters", "system:authenticated"]
    },
    "sourceIPs": ["172.31.22.88"],
    "userAgent": "kubectl/v1.23.6 (linux/amd64) kubernetes/ad33385",
    "objectRef": {
        "resource": "serviceaccounts",
        "namespace": "default",
        "apiVersion": "v1"
    },
    "requestReceivedTimestamp": "2022-07-31T08:36:48.679291Z",
    "stageTimestamp": "2022-07-31T08:36:48.679291Z"
}
```

For more information on Kubernetes audit logs, we suggest you to read [this](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/debug/debug-cluster/audit/)

At the moment, the Kubernetes audit logs can be found on `control-plane` nodes only at the location `/var/log/apiserver/audit*.log` that you can ship to your <abbr title="Security information and event management">SIEM</abbr> system.

The Kubernetes audit logs will be shipped to our [Managed Loki](https://github.com/giantswarm/roadmap/issues/311) in the future.

> 

Author: Why though? This makes the roadmap item visible to customers

#### Giant Swarm default audit policy

Here is the Giant Swarm audit policy configured by default on all our clusters (management and workload clusters alike):

```yaml
apiVersion: audit.k8s.io/v1
kind: Policy

> rules:

Reviewer 2: Maybe this https://github.com/giantswarm/k8s-initiator-app/blob/main/examples/values_audit_policy.yaml ?

> rules:

Author: This example is a custom thing I configured for customers.

Also, yes I would prefer that but our policy is not defined in one place but for each provider so unless we have 1 to rule them all I do not think it makes sense to use a link

> rules:

Author: For instance, if we link https://github.com/giantswarm/cluster-aws/blob/master/helm/cluster-aws/files/etc/kubernetes/policies/audit-policy.yaml I would wonder if it's different for azure and so on. Product needs to have 1 defined in one place sure but  I cannot fix everything :D

#### Custom configuration

If the Giant Swarm default Kubernetes Audit Policy is not sufficient for your use case, you can configure as you want.

To configure the policy for your management cluster, get in touch with your Account engineer and we will help you sort it out.

For your workload clusters, you can deploy the [k8s-initiator-app](https://github.com/giantswarm/k8s-initiator-app) App to your cluster to deploy the whatever Audit Policy configuration you want.

__Warning:__ Beware that the k8s-initiator-app can change Kubernetes api server settings and any misconfiguration might cause it to go down. We advise you to ask your Account Engineer for help to configure it safely.

### Machine audit logs

To provide you with a better visibility and security, Giant Swarm offers you the possibility to access the Machine audit logs.

This solution relies on the [Linux Audit Daemon](https://linux.die.net/man/8/auditd) to collect the logs of any execution happening on the machine.
It is currently configured as such:

```
-a exit,always -F arch=b64 -S execve -k auditing # -k auditing gives those logs a key so we can easily retrieve them
-a exit,always -F arch=b32 -S execve -k auditing

> ```

Author: Same remark as above, It's not even in CAPI, it's defined in different places for MC and WC and I'm not sure it's even public :(

This configuration asks the Linux Audit Daemon to trace any `execve` signal happening on the node and renders logs like:

```sh
Feb 06 09:57:37 ip-10-0-5-34.eu-central-1.compute.internal kernel: audit: type=1300 audit(1675677457.491:6132447): arch=c000003e syscall=59 success=yes exit=0 a0=55a8f8fc7fd0 a1=55a8f947eec0 a2=55a8f9b8fd10 a3=55a8f947eec0 items=2 ppid=1 pid=3659596 auid=4294967295 uid=0 gid=0 euid=0 suid=0 fsuid=0 egid=0 sgid=0 fsgid=0 tty=(none) ses=4294967295 comm="update-ssh-keys" exe="/usr/bin/update-ssh-keys" subj=system_u:system_r:kernel_t:s0 key="auditing"
```

> Beware that the Linux Audit Daemon is quite verbose when it comes to logging so you will need to ensure enough storage and bandwidth for your logs. For this we suggest you use either a SIEM tool, Opensearch or Loki
> 
> At the moment, the Machine audit logs can be found in `journald` so you can ship them over to your <abbr title="Security information and event management">SIEM</abbr> system.
> 
> __Notice:__ The Linux Audit Daemon logs are kernel logs so they need to be accessed as such (e.g. `journalctl -kauditing`)

Reviewer 2: Re-ordering and re-phrasing this section

```suggestion
The Linux Audit Daemon logs are kernel logs which are stored in `journald` and can be accessed with `journalctl -kauditing`.

__Warning:__ Beware that the Linux Audit Daemon is quite verbose so when shipping those logs you will need to ensure enough storage and bandwidth are available in order to process them.
```

The Machine audit logs will be shipped to our [Managed Loki](https://github.com/giantswarm/roadmap/issues/311) in the future.

> 

Author: I answered on the prior remark about the roadmap item. I would rather we make our work visible without setting expectations

## How to ship your audit logs to a remote location

Giant Swarm offers two tools to allow you to get the audit logs for your workload clusters.

__Note__: You can also access the access logs for the management clusters but this is not something we provide by default (at least for now). Please contact your Account Engineer to sort out the details.

### Fluent bit

Giant Swarm provides a custom [Fluent-bit](https://fluentbit.io/) configuration packaged as a Managed App named [`fluent-logshipping-app`](https://github.com/giantswarm/fluent-logshipping-app)

Fluent-bit's main advantage is that it can be used for all kinds of cases (shipping to rsyslog, elasticsearch, loki and so on) and provides a lot of configurability with it's plugin system so you can use it if this is what you need.

### Promtail

> As we are providing [Loki as Managed app](https://github.com/giantswarm/loki-app), we also provide our customers with [Promtail](https://github.com/giantswarm/promtail-app) for log collection and shipping.
> 
> Note that Promtail can only be used with Loki but it provides a better integration with it (targets and labels found using Service Discovery instead of on the node directly).

Reviewer 2: I would keep it simple and focused on Promtail here

```suggestion
[Promtail](https://github.com/giantswarm/promtail-app) can only be used with Loki but it provides a better integration via its discovery mechanism rather than hardcoding file path.
```

Is this what you meant there? Also is it true that we can discover audits logs?

Author: No for audit logs we need to configure the path directly but for container logs that is true. @hervenicol can you confirm or not? :D

---
linkTitle: Audit logging
title: Audit logging
description: A guide explaining how to interact with audit logs on Giant Swarm clusters.
weight: 50
menu:
  main:
    identifier: getting-started-observability-logs-auditlogging
    parent: getting-started-observability-logs
user_questions:
  - What are audit logs?
  - What is audit logging?
  - How can I access Kubernetes audit logs?
  - How do I ship audit logs to a remote locations?
aliases:
  - /ui-api/observability/logs/audit-logging
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-atlas
last_review_date: 2023-01-30
---

In this document you will learn what are audit logs, which kind is available on Giant Swarm clusters and how to access / ship them to a remote location.

__Warning:__ This feature and the documentation is quite new, so do not hesitate to ask for support or help us improve this documentation.

## Audit logs

TODO: Brief summary here and then link https://www.datadoghq.com/knowledge-center/audit-logging/

## At Giant Swarm

> In all Giant Swarm clusters, Giant Swarm provides two kinds of audit logs, Kubernetes audit logs (logging every activity on the kubernetes API Server) and Virtual Machine audit logs (any execution running on the host).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In all Giant Swarm clusters, two kinds of audit logs are provided:
- Kubernetes audit logs: logging all activity on the Kubernetes API Server
- Machine audit logs: any system calls and file access happening on the host (e.g. login attempts, user commands, file system changes, etc...)
```

### Kubernetes Audit Logs

> The Kubernetes api-server supports audit logging by default. This mechanism log every request made to it by both service accounts and users. Customers can ingest this audit log to detect if any suspicious behavior (internal or by a 3rd party.is made to their kubernetes clusters. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Kubernetes api-server supports audit logging by default. This mechanism logs every request made to it by both service accounts and users. Customers can ingest these audit logs to detect if any suspicious behaviour (internal or by a 3rd party) is made to their Kubernetes clusters. 
```

__Warning:__ This feature is currently unavailable on CAPI clusters.

TODO add sample of logs

For more information on Kubernetes audit logs, we suggest you to read [this](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/debug/debug-cluster/audit/)

> The Kubernetes audit logs can be found on `master/control-plane` nodes only at `/var/log/apiserver/audit*.log

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Kubernetes audit logs can be found on `master/control-plane` nodes only at `/var/log/apiserver/audit*.log`
```
